
This is the README file for the Schlampisoft Xwindows Workbench Version 1.0

Copyright(C)1995 by Michael Sohmen
mail: uk6i@ibm3090.rz.uni-karlsruhe.de / uk6i@dkauni2.bitnet

This program is freeware, according to the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
(for details see below).  This is the first version of this program, so
please write if you detect errors, or if you have ideas or suggestions
for improving this Software.  If you write some usable extensions,
please send it to me and include a description.

PLATFORM:
Linux, Xwindows; based on Xlib and Xview. The source file could be compiled on
other platforms that provide the Xview library.

INSTALLATION:
You should have at last the xwb.c sourcefile and the xwb.config
configuration file.  For making xwb you need the Xview library as well
as the Xlib. If using the Makefile doesn`t work, use one of the
Makefiles from the Xview example programs and rewrite it, then run
xmkmf, and make. A dynamic linked executable is included, compiled
under Linux.

ABOUT:
With the program xwb I tried to produce an universal tool to make
programming in C and editing text more comfortable. First I wanted to
write an editor for GNU C, then I found it could as well be used for
writing TeX documents, for this works analoguous in command-line
style.  Then I had the main Idea to make the compiler and the execution
calls more flexible, so that it can be used for any programming
language. The compiler configuration resides in xwb.config, you have to
adjust it for your computer, you can add another compiler.  While the
compiler is running you can proceed editing the text in the text window
for the file is not changed before you save it. For saving the file
you`ve to wait until the compiler doesn`t run anymore.

CONFIGURATION:
This program is configured for programming GNU C, writing TeX or LaTeX
documents.  If you`re a fortran, modula, pascal, ... programmer I would
be happy if you send me your configuration for some of this languages;
I will add it then in later versions.  You have to change the printer
configuration if you don`t use an epson escp2 compatib- le printer.

BUGS:
This is the first version of xwb, so there could be a lot of bugs.
There`s one I know about, but couldn`t fix it yet: In the File menu
Open - and Save as submenu memory is allocated for file list but not
released; so it sometime happens that memory for this function is
exceeded. This menus don`t sort alphabetical yet, sorry...

If you have a description for the filemenu tool from Xview R3.1, send
it to me, I don`t.  Before using the functions from toolmenu save the
file; use the Save as function when you`ve written the first lines of
your document, for they sometimes don`t work as they should.

Caution: the "save as" function has some bugs. Use it better earlier
than later, not to lose the work of a longer time if a critical bug
occurs.

STARTING:
In Xview applications the pulldown menu is created by pressing the
right button; left button would select the first item from pulldown
menu. For using all comfort of xwb you should read the Quick
introduction from Help menu. On right button click on text window a
pop-up menu is created wich provides some more text-editing functions,
but prefer the top-menu, for both menus are independent.  The xwb frame
can`t be resized by mouse yet; you can use the parameter -geometry if
you want to use another size; if you like another font use the -fn
parameter.

FUTURE VERSIONS:
I want to extend the menu with functions for changing the fonts and
colors next; as well I want to add a flexible function for handling
error messages returned by the compiler which reads the line number and
automatically jumps to the line the eroor was found and indicates it.
If you want to write functions to improve xwb, write!

That`s all for now -
I hope you enjoy working with xwb.

Michael Sohmen

            ||||
           _____
          / _  _ \
         |  O  O  |_ 
      _______     | )
     /            |_)             
     \_________   |                _ _  
          \ -==-  /           ____(o(o)\_
           _____           ()          \ \________
            |  |             \_______/ |  \       \
          /      \                 |   |  |        |====
         |        |                 \   \_/        |
         | .    . |                  || |=======|| |
         | |    | |                  /| |       || |
         | |    | |                 [ [ ]       [[ }
