INTRODUCTION
------------

WorkMan is a graphical tool for playing audio compact discs on a CD-ROM
drive.  It has most of the features available on standalone CD players,
such as a shuffle mode, programmable playlists, and elapsed/remaining
timers.  But it also has extra features, foremost of which is the ability
to store information about CDs in a database, then automatically extract
that information when the CD is inserted later.  WorkMan stores the
artist's name, the disc title, the names of individual tracks, and even
remembers which tracks you don't want to hear!  All in an easy-to-use,
attractive OPEN LOOK graphical interface.


WHAT NOW?
---------

Much of WorkMan's documentation, including the installation instructions,
is in HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) format, suitable for viewing with
your favorite WWW browser.  The files are all in the "HTML" subdirectory.
If you're using Netscape, for instance, type

	netscape file:`pwd`/HTML/index.html

(those are backquotes, not regular single quotes!) to get to the main menu,
or open the index document in a browser that's already running.  You
shouldn't have to put the docs on an HTTP server; the "file:" URL lets you
get at files on the local filesystem.  You might have to put "//localhost"
before the local path, just after the colon.

If you don't have a Web browser handy, text-only copies of the HTML files
are in the "DOCS" directory.  See "install" and the "notes" file for your
specific platform for installation instructions.

The manual page (workman.man) contains a brief description of the user
interface, though for the most part you should be able to start using
the tool right away without reading the docs.  The workmandb.man manual
page describes the database file format.


Steven Grimm
koreth@hyperion.com
June 4, 1995
