\begindata{text,539040100}
\textdsversion{12}
\template{default}
\define{global
}
There are many other AMS features that have not yet been mentioned in this 
demo, or are under development.  A few are outlined briefly here:


\bold{FLAMES}:  FLAMES, the Filtering Language for the Andrew Message System, 
is a powerful and general LISP-like language for operating on the message 
database; the primary initial application is automatic classification of 
incoming messages.  For example, you can automatically classify, delete, or 
redistribute incoming mail based on its origin or contents.  In the future we 
will also be concentrating on improved customization facilities, intelligent 
selection of messages, and automatic network-based information services.


\bold{ODA} (Office Document Architecture): The Andrew project has also 
developed a general toolkit for ODA, an emerging standard for the interchange 
of multi-media documents.  Eventually, we hope to use ODA to exchange mail 
with other multi-media message systems that use different internal 
representations for multi-media documents.


\bold{Name resolution}:  Our White Pages technology has proven so successful 
that we are considering ways to expand it to include names from non-Andrew and 
non-local sources, leading eventually toward the goal of a "national white 
pages".  Currently, we are exploring the automatic creation of a heuristic 
national database, built out of addresses that have been collected 
automatically by the delivery system.


\bold{Expansion of Client Base}:  Efforts are underway at CMU to increase the 
functionality available to AMS users on systems such as the Macintosh and VMS 
timesharing systems.


\bold{Event calendars}:  The Andrew system includes a general calendar 
facility, called CHAMP, which includes some unusual features such as support 
for calendar systems other than the standard Gregorian calendar.  A simple 
Messages option makes it easy to view events scheduled with CHAMP on your 
Messages startup screen.


\begindata{bp,537558784}
\enddata{bp,537558784}
\view{bpv,537558784,1495,0,0}
Copyright 1992 Carnegie Mellon University and IBM.  All rights reserved.

\smaller{\smaller{$Disclaimer: 

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its 

documentation for any purpose is hereby granted without fee, 

provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that 

both that copyright notice, this permission notice, and the following 

disclaimer appear in supporting documentation, and that the names of 

IBM, Carnegie Mellon University, and other copyright holders, not be 

used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software 

without specific, written prior permission.



IBM, CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY, AND THE OTHER COPYRIGHT HOLDERS 

DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING 

ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS.  IN NO EVENT 

SHALL IBM, CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY, OR ANY OTHER COPYRIGHT HOLDER 

BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY 

DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, 

WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS 

ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE 

OF THIS SOFTWARE.

 $

}}\enddata{text,539040100}
